So, we're gonna talk
about a few things here.
First is the vec type that
we're gonna talk about usize,
which someone asked about earlier.
Talk about stack memory,
and finally, heap memory.
So we're gonna get a little bit further
into our exploration of memory and
how it relates to rust.
Okay, let's start with
talking about vectors.
So, we saw previously how to
define an array of years.
Here's how to define a vector or
vec for short of years.
So I'm saying let mut yours is Vec<i32.
So there's those angle brackets
like we saw with options, so
this is a type parameter saying,
= vec exclamation point,
so this is a macro, 1985, 2000, 2005.
Now, unlike arrays, we actually
can increase the size of vectors.
So I can say years.push 2010.
So now years has 4
elements ending in 2010.
So this is pushing 2010
onto the end of the vector.
We can also call push again on it and
push that onto the end.
So now we'd have 2010 and
2015 on the end there.
Notice by the way that we would only be
able to do this if we have let mut yours.
If I tried to call push, and
this was not defined let mut it would say
you can't do that because push mutates.
And you're only allowed to mutate
things that are defined with mut.
And then once I was done with that,
I could say number of years and
then call the len method on yours which
returns the length of the years vector.
So, couple things to note about this.
Number one, much like arrays,
you do have to specify what the type of
every single one of these elements is.
So in this case, I said,
every single one of these elements
inside this vec has to be i32.
But, unlike arrays,
I don't have to hard code the length.
So that's because the length is allowed
to change at runtime with a vector,
I'm allowed to push things onto the vec.
And I'm also allowed there's
other things like pop,
which will take things off of the vec.
And that's also why
there's a length method.
So you can imagine with an array, it
wouldn't be that useful to have a method
for it because the length is hard coded
at compile time, it's never gonna change.
But in the case of a vector,
it actually can change at runtime.
So the len method will return the current
length of that year's vector.
So initially, if I call .len on this,
it would be 3, but
at this point it would now be 5 because
I pushed two more elements onto it.
Usize comes up in the context of length
because len actually returns not a u64 or
u16 or u32 but
rather something called usize.
So usize is a little bit interesting,
it's a little bit different than
the number size that we've seen before.
And what's different about it is that it's
almost always in practice either a u32 or
use 64 because usize the size of it varies
based on the system you're compiling for.
So on a 64 bit system,
usize is equivalent to a u64, but
on a 32 bit system,
it's equivalent to a u32.
And if there are still 16 bits
systems around on a 16 bit system,
it would be the equivalent of u16.
I don't know of any 128 bit systems,
but if there were usize on
those systems would be u128.
So, a good example of a modern
32 bit system is Web Assembly is
actually 32 bit right now.
Whereas pretty much every other machine
you're gonna encounter is gonna be 64 bit.
Like [LAUGH] this laptop is 64 bit,
any like mobile phone you've got or
like a tablet is gonna be 64 bit,
32 bit systems are like older systems or
Web Assembly.
Although granted, they're actually working
on a 64 bit version of Web Assembly, but
it hasn't really been released yet.
I don't think there are any
browsers that implement it yet.
So in practice, really what usize means,
at least in this day and age is generally
speaking is gonna be either u64 or u32
depending on what you're compiling for,
it's almost always gonna
be one of those two.
And that's the type of
length like whenever you
store the length of a particular vector,
it's always gonna be usize.
This is actually a really common thing
where length values are stored as usize.
It's true for vectors, it's also true for
strings, it's true for
a number of different data structures.
So this is the most common context
in which you will see usize come up.
But other one that we didn't
talk about was array indexes.
When your indexing into an array
with the square brackets,
the type of the value that you put
in there is also gonna be usize.
So, not really something that you need
to like get a ton of detail about but
it's basically is just either u32 or u64.
Okay, so let's talk about a few more
differences between vectors and arrays.
So here we have an array called nums and
this is 3 u8s, so 1, 2, 3.
And here we have a vector of u8s.
So you can kind of see
the differences in the types here.
We still have the u8 because we're say,
all the elements have to be u8 but
we didn't have to put the 3 here,
although we did put vec and
then angle brackets instead
of square brackets.
And of course, when you're making the
vector you actually call the vec macro,
rather than just using square brackets.
This does highlight another feature of
macros that we haven't seen before,
which is macros can actually be used to
you can call macros without parentheses.
You can use call them with other things
like square brackets or curly braces.
That's just like one of the things that
macros let you do that functions don't.
Functions are always called with
parentheses but macros, yeah,
you can potentially call them with
other things depending on the macro.
The vec macro says give me square
brackets because it wants to kind of look
like arrays whereas like print line and
format, that wouldn't really make sense.
So of course,
they want you to use parentheses.
Now of node, we can't actually do a for
loop over either of these.
Whether it's a vec, or it's an array,
we can still do a for
loop over that thing.
Basically, this might seem like,
well, what's the difference?
Why would you you ever want to use
an array if you could use a vec?
And basically there's a trade off there
in terms of how they're represented
in memory.
And basically the trade off there sort of
set the stage for the number one biggest
factor in language performance,
which is how heap memory is managed.
So, it might seem like
a small difference and
it might seem like you would always use
a vec cuz it's just like way better.
It's more flexible,
there's no reason to ever use an array.
But behind the scenes in terms of memory
management, they're quite different.
And, this is also relates to some of
the borrow checking errors that you'll
see later on.
So, we're gonna take some time now and
just talk about the difference between
stack memory and heap memory and
how that pertains to vec in particular.
>> So vectors are still you have to be
consistently typed within a vector,
correct?
>> Correct, yeah, you still have the same
restriction where every single one of
the elements and
that really has to do with the for loops.
Like when you're iterating through this
Russ needs to be able to say like,
I know exactly what the type of num is.
And then in both of these cases,
that's true.
In both cases, it knows that it's
always gonna have a u8 in there